Tufte's writing about the role of visualization in the Challenger disaster is a poignant introduction to the importance of visualization. His basic argument is that if the engineers at Thiokol had presented NASA with visualizations that better characterized the risks of a cold-weather launch, a disaster could have been averted. He notes that there were other forces at play, including a potential press opportunity with the teacher-astronaut during Reagan's upcoming state of the union address, so I question whether perfectly executed visualizations would really have changed the decision to launch. This is a digression, but it's important that we see visualization for what it is: a means of communicating data. A visualization can provide a useful window into a dataset, but there are many ways that visualization can go wrong. Tufte spends a chapter on "Graphical Integrity," discussing exactly this.

In that chapter, Tufte presents a series of graphics with tons of chart junk and very high "lie factors," or the ratio in which the effect in the graphic is exaggerated over the effect in the data. This is a great chapter for two reasons: first, it gets the reader on Tufte's side. Given my generally positive attitude toward the New York Times, I was surprised to see that they produced so many misleading graphics in earlier years. The examples presented in this chapter are particularly egregious, and leave (more or less) no room for argument about their merits. The second reason that this is a great chapter is that it presents several simple tips for producing high-integrity visualizations, like "show data variation, not design variation." These tips are empowering because they seem easy enough to follow, and compared to the awful visualizations in this chapter, it doesn't seem so hard to create a good visualization.

On the other hand, the first chapter of The Visual Display shows exactly how challenging it can be to create an excellent visualization. Many of the examples therein are beautiful and highly communicative, but are not by any means "obvious"-- it took a keen observer to figure out how best to show the data. In some sense, the first two chapters of this book are setting up a lower bound and an upper bound for designing visualizations: here is your goal (Napoleon's march) and here is what to avoid (magical parallelopipeds).

As a side note, I occasionally become frustrated with Tufte's authority/ego with throwaway lines like, "It may well be the best statistical graphic ever drawn."
